## Building requirements

You will need a proper Linux environment, with a modern C++ toolchain installed.  
Specifically, I suggest `clang-19` as this repo is using modern C23 features like `#embed` to make everyone's life a bit easier.
In addition to that, this repo makes use of:

- [meson](https://mesonbuild.com/) as its main build system. Any recent-ish version will do (unless you want zig to simplify cross-compiling for which 1.60 is needed)
- [bun](https://bun.sh/) as the ts/js runtime to support some codegen and the more complex releasing pipelines.  
   I hate bash, and this is what replaces it.
- [libcurl] unless you are trying to compile a release without it, which is supported.

At the moment only Linux is supported, probably on any of the major CPU architecture. Possibly some more UNIX-like systems.  
This is just temporary limitation, as all dependencies are portable, but my own code is not.

## Building process

Start by installing all the `bun` dependencies needed:
```bash
bun install
```

Then run the following npm scripts:

```bash
bun run codegen             #Initial codegen from schemas
bun run meson-setup         #Set up the meson builddir
```

You might want to use `meson-setup.clang` to use clang-19 if installed in your system, and the default compiler might not support all the modern features needed.  


To perform tests and benchmarks:

```bash
bun run test
bun run benchmark
```

To run the dev demo where features under development are tested:

```bash
bun run vs.example
```

`meson-install` is not implemented yet. `prepare-release` works, but it is only meant for automatic pipelines at this stage.

### Patches

If not using a precompiled version of sqlite on your system, the `meson.build` of its amalgamate might need patching:

```
  override_options: ['c_std=gnu23'],
```

at the end of the library generation. The issue is tracked [here](https://github.com/mesonbuild/wrapdb/issues/1747)

## A word on codegen

A significant portion of code in this repository is generated automatically and does not ship with your `git clone`.  
Make sure you run `bun run codegen` before you attempt any further step with meson. I will probably integrate it as part of the meson setup step.

The main source for automatic code generation is located in `/schemas`. The json component definitions are compiled down into C++ classes, c bindings, typescript type definitions, XSD schemas and XML data used in the embedded editor of `vs`.  
Any component shipped with `vs` (not those externally distributed in `/components`) must have a json schema definition, even if their class definition is not automatically generated.

During development, you might want to use `codegen.quick` in place of `codegen`, as long as you are not altering the number of files involved or their naming. Some changes in the schemas will be incompatible with `codegen.quick`, so if you don't observe what you expect just perform a full refresh.

## Structure of the repo

- **src** where most of the source for `vs` and the `vs-fltk` library are located.
- **include** as before for the header files.
- **test** test suite for `vs` & `vs-fltk` library.
- **experiments** playground where new ideas or semi-standalone prototypes are tested.
- **components** native components to ship alongside `vs` but not embedded in `vs`.
- **docs** this documentation.
- **bindings** bindings for all languages supported in `script`.
- **scripts** utility scripts for the building process or distribution.
- **schemas** high level specs, source of information for documentation and automatic codegen.
- **commons** extra public files (some autogenerated) which are part of every `vs` distribution.
